good evening from the field house at
washington university in st louis i'm
jim lehrer of the newshour on pbs and i
welcome you to this third and final
campaign 2000 debate between the
democratic candidate for president vice
president al gore and the republican
candidate governor george w bush of
texas let's welcome the candidates now
before proceeding tonight we would like
to observe a moment of silence in memory
of governor mel carnahan of missouri who
along with his son and his former chief
of staff died in a private plane crash
last night near st louis
a reminder as we continue now that these
debates are sponsored by the commission
on presidential debates the formats and
the rules were worked out by the
commission and the two campaigns
tonight's questions will be asked by st
louis area voters who were identified as
being uncommitted by the gallup
organization earlier today each of them
wrote a question on a small card like
this those cards were collected and then
given to me this afternoon my job under
the rules of the evening was to decide
the order the questions will be asked
and to call on the questioners
accordingly i also have the option of
asking follow-ups which in order to get
to more of the panel's questions for the
record i plan to do sparingly and mostly
for clarifications the audience
participants are bound by the following
rule they shall not ask follow-up
questions or otherwise participate in
the extended discussion and the
questioner's microphone will be turned
off after he or she completes asking the
question those are the rules as in
winston-salem last last week no single
answer or response from a candidate can
exceed two minutes there is an audience
here in the hall and they have promised
to remain absolutely quiet as did their
predecessors this year in boston
danville and winston-salem before we
begin a correction from last week's
debate i was wrong when i said vice
president gore's campaign commercials
had called governor bush a bumbler that
specific charge was made in a press
statement by gore campaign spokesman mark
fabiani not in a tv guide i'm glad you clarified that in a tv ad now
let's go to the first question of over
the 130 questions we received from this
panel we will begin with one of the 19
on health issues and it goes to you mr
vice president and it will be asked by
james hankins mr hankins
how do you feel about hmos and insurance
companies making the critical decisions
that affect people's lives instead of
the medical professionals and why are
the hmos and insurance companies not
held accountable for for their decisions
mr hankins i don't feel good about it
and i think we ought to have a patient's
bill of rights to take the medical
decisions away from the hmos and give
them back to the doctors and the nurses
i want to come back and and tell you why
but if you will forgive me i would like
to say something right now at the
beginning of this debate following on
the moment of silence for mel carnahan
and randy carnahan and chris sifford
tipper and i were good friends with mel
and randy and i know that all of us here
want to extend our sympathy and
condolences to jean and the family and
to the sifford family and i'd just like
to say that this debate in a way is a
living tribute to mel carnahan because
he loved the vigorous discussion of
ideas in our democracy he was a
fantastic governor of missouri this
state became one of the top five in the
nation for health care coverage for
children under his leadership one of the
best in advancing all kinds of benefits
for children to grow up healthy and
strong and of course this debate also
takes place at a time when the tragedy
of the uss cole is on our minds and
hearts and insofar as the memorial
service is tomorrow i would like to also
extend sympathy to the families of those
who have died and those who are still
missing and the injured now mr hankins i
think that the the situation that you
describe has gotten completely out of
hand doctors are are giving prescriptions
they're recommending treatments and then
their their recommendations are being
overruled by hmos and insurance
companies that is unacceptable i support
a strong national patient's bill of
rights it is actually a disagreement
between us the national law that is
pending on this
the dingle-norwood bill a
bipartisan bill is one that i support
time is up and that the governor does not two minutes
response governor bush i too want to
extend my prayers to the and blessings
god's blessings on the families whose
lives were overturned yes tod
last night it was a tragic moment
actually mr vice president it's not true
i i do support a national patient's bill
of rights as a matter of fact i brought
republicans and democrats together to do
just that in the state of texas to get a
patient's bill of rights through it
requires a different kind of leadership
style to do it though you see in order
to get something done on behalf of the
people you have to put partisanship
aside and that's what we did in my state
we've got one of the most advanced
patient's bill of rights it says for
example that a woman can doesn't have to
go through a gatekeeper to go to her
gynecologist it says that you can't gag
a doctor doctor can advise you the hmo
the insurance company can't gag that
doctor from giving you full advice and
this particular bill it allows patients
to choose a doctor their own doctor if
they want to but we did something else
that was interesting we're one of the
first states that said you can sue an
hmo for denying you proper coverage now
there's what's called an independent
review organization that you have to go
through first it says if you got a
complaint with your insurance company
you can take your complaint to an
objective body if the objective body
rules on your behalf the insurance
company must follow those rules however
if the if the insurance company doesn't
follow the findings of the iro then that
becomes a cause of action in a court of
law it's time for our nation to come
together and do what's right for the
people and i think this is right for the
people you know i support a national
patient's bill of rights mr vice
president and
i want all people covered i don't want
the law to supersede good law like we
got in texas governor time is up
sir jim we have a direct disagreement on this
just just a minute mr vice president i wanted
to y'know the way the rules go here
now two minutes two minutes and then
i'll decide whether we go on okay so
what i want to make sure is we
understand here is before we go on to
another question in the health area
would you agree that you two agree on
a national patient's bill of rights
absolutely absolutely not i referred to
the dingle-norwood bill it is the
bipartisan bill that is now pending in
the congress the the hmos and the
insurance companies support the other
bill that's pending the one that the
republican majority has put forward they
like it because it doesn't accomplish
what i think really needs to be
accomplished to give the decisions back
to the doctors and nurses and to give
you a right of appeal to somebody other
than the hmo or insurance company let
you go to the nearest emergency room
without having to call an hmo before you
call 911 to let you see a
special a specialist if you need to
and it has strong bipartisan support it is
being blocked by the republican
leadership so in the congress and i
specifically would like to know whether
governor bush will support the
dingle-norwood bill which is the main one
pending governor bush you may answer
that if you'd like but also i'd like to know how
you see the differences between the two
of you and we need to move on well the
difference is is that i can get it done
that i can get something positive done
on behalf of the people that's what the
question in this campaign is about it's
not only what's your philosophy and
what's your position on issues but can
you get things done and i believe i can
all right what about the dingle-norwood
bill all right we're going to go now i'm
not quite through let me finish the ques i
talked about the principles and the
issues that i think are important in a
patient's bill of rights y'know
there's this this kind of washington dc
focus well it's in this committee
or it's got this sponsor if i'm the
president we're gonna have emergency
room care
we're gonna have gag orders women will have
direct access to ob/gyn people will be able
to take their hmo insurance company to
court that's what i've done in texas and
that's the kind of leadership style i'll
bring to washington all right another
the next question also on uh on health
issue is from it will be asked by marie
payne kloepy and it goes to governor
bush are either of you concerned with
i gotta put my glasses on here ya go are either of you
concerned with finding some feasible way
to lower the price of pharmaceutical
drugs such as education on minimizing
intake revamp of the fda process or
streamlining the drug companies
procedures instead of just finding more
money to pay for them well that's a
great question i um i think one of the
problems we have particularly for
seniors is there's no prescription drug
coverage in medicare and therefore when
they have to try to purchase drugs they
do so on their own there's no kind of
collective bargaining there's no power
of purchasing among seniors so i think
step one to make sure prescription drugs
is more affordable for seniors and those
are the folks who really rely upon
prescription drugs a lot these days is
to reform the medicare system is to have
prescription drugs as an integral part
of medicare once and for all the problem
we have today is that like the patient's
bill of rights particularly with health care
there's a lot of bickering in washington
dc it's kind of like a political issue
as opposed to a people issue so what i
want to do is i want to call upon
republicans and democrats to forget all
the arguing and finger pointing and come
together and take care of our seniors
with a prescription drug program that
says we'll pay for the poor seniors we'll
help all seniors with prescription drugs
in the meantime i think it's important
to have what's called immediate helping
hand which is direct money to states so
that seniors poor seniors don't have to
choose between food and medicine
that's that's part of an overall overhaul but
purchasing power is important i'm
against price controls
i think price controls would hurt our
ability to continue important research
and development drug therapies are
replacing a lot of medicines as as we
used to know it one of the most important
things is to continue the research and
development component and so i'm
against price controls expediting drugs
through the fda makes sense of course
allowing the new bill that was passed in
the congress made sense to allow for you
know drugs that were sold overseas to
come back and other countries to come
back into the united states that makes
sense but the best thing to do is to
reform medicare vice president gore two
minutes all right here we go again now
look if you want someone who will spend
a lot of words describing a whole
convoluted process and then end up
supporting legislation that is supported
by the big drug companies this is your
man if you want someone who will fight
for you and who will fight for the
middle-class families and working men
and women who are sick and tired of
having their parents and grandparents
pay higher prices for prescription drugs
than anybody else then i want to fight
for you and you ask the the a great
question because it's not only seniors
listen for 24 years i have never been
afraid to take on the big drug companies
they do some great things they discover
great new cures and that's great we want
to we want them to continue that but
they are now spending more money on
advertising and promotion you see all
these ads than they are on research and
development and they're trying to
artificially extend the monopoly patent
protection so they can keep charging
these very high prices
i want to streamline the approval of the
competing generic drugs and the new
kinds of treatments that can
compete with them so that we bring
the price down for everybody now briefly
let me tell you how my prescription drug
plan works the governor talked about
medicare i get i propose a real
prescription drug benefit under medicare
for all seniors all seniors and here's
how it works you pick your own doctor
and nobody can take that away from you
the doctor chooses the prescription that
you need and nobody can overrule your
doctor you go to your own pharmacy and
then medicare pays half the price if
you're poor they pay all of it if you
have extraordinarily high cost then they
pay all over 4,000 dollars
out-of-pocket and i'll bring new
competition to bring the price down and
if you pass the big drug companies bill
nothing will happen
alright another health question it comes
from vickie french and it's for you vice
president gore vickie french where are
you oh there she is yes we spend billions of dollars every year on taxes or pay billions of dollars in taxes would you be
open to the idea of a national health
care plan for everybody and if not why
if so is this something you would try to
implement if you're elected into office
and what would you do to implement this
plan i think that we should move step by
step toward universe universal health
coverage but i am not in favor of
government doing it all
we've spent 65 years now on the
development of a hybrid system partly
private partly public and 85% of our
people have health insurance 15%
don't that adds up to 44 million people
that is a national outrage we have got
to get health coverage for those who do
not have it and we've got to improve the
quality for those who do with a
patient's bill of rights that's real and
that works the dingle-norwood bill and
we have got to fill in the gaps in
coverage by finally bringing parity for
the treatment of mental illness because
that's been left out we've got to deal
with long-term care now here are the
steps that i would take first of all i
will make a commitment to bring health
care coverage of high quality that is
affordable to every single child in
america within four years and then we'll fill
other gaps by covering the
parents of those children when the
family is poor or up to two and a half
times the poverty rate i want to give a
tax credit for the purchase of
individual health insurance plans i want
to give small business employers a tax
credit 25 percent to encourage the uh the
providing of health insurance for the
employees in small businesses i want to
give seniors who are well the near
elderly i don't like that term because
i'm just about in that category but
those 55 to 65 ought to be able to buy
into medicare for premiums that are
reasonable and fair and significantly
below what they have to to get now now
we have a big we have a big difference
on this and you need to know the record
here under governor bush texas has sunk
to be 50th out of 50 in health care in
health insurance for their citizens last
week he said that they were spending 3.7
billion dollars or 4.7 billion dollars
on this mr vice president
okay time is up governor bush two minutes
i'm absolutely opposed to a national
health care plan i don't want the
federal government making decisions for
consumers or for providers i remember what
the administration tried to do in 1993
they tried to have a national health care
plan and fortunately it failed i trust
people i don't trust the federal
government it's gonna be one of the themes
you hear tonight i don't want the
federal government making decisions on
behalf of everybody there is an issue
with the uninsured there sure is and we've
got uninsured people in my state ours is a
big state fast growing state we share a
common border with another nation but
we're providing health care for our
people it's one thing about insurance
that's a washington term question is are
people getting health care and we've got
a strong safety net and there needs to
be a safety net in america
there needs to be more community health
clinics for the poor can go get health
care we need a program for the uninsured
they've been talking about it in
washington dc the number of uninsured
has now gone up for the past seven years
we need we need a two thousand dollar
credit rebate for people working people
who don't have insurance they can get in
the marketplace and start purchasing
insurance we need to have allow small
businesses to write insurance
across jurisdictional lines so small
business can afford health care small
restaurants can afford health care and
so health care needs to be affordable
and available but we got to trust
people to make decisions with their
lives in the medicare reform i talk
about it says if you're a senior you can
stay in medicare if you like it and
that's fine but we're gonna give you
other choices to choose if you want to
do so just like they do the federal
employees the people who work in
washington dc for the u.s congress or the
united states senate get a variety of
choices to make in their lives and
that's what we ought to do for all
people in america yes sir sorry governor can i have a
follow up jim not paying attention to my
lights very well not right now education trying
to find my light these folks
submitted 18 18 questions on on
education and the first one is that
will be asked on
education will go to you governor and
will be asked by angie pettig angie
pettig where are you there she
is governor right there thanks hi angie
i've heard a lot about education and the
need to hold teachers and schools
accountable and i certainly agree with
that but as an individual with an
educational background and also a parent
i have seen a lot of instances where the
parents are unresponsive to the teachers
or flat-out uninvolved in their child's
education how do you intend to not only
hold the teachers and schools
accountable but also hold parents
accountable well you know it's hard to
make people love one another
i wish i knew the law cause i'd darn sure
sign it i wish i knew the law that said all
of us would be good parents one of the
things the next president must do is to
remind people that if we're gonna have a
responsible period in america that each
of us must love our children with all
our heart and all our soul i happen to
believe strong accountability encourages
parental involvement though i think when
you measure and post results on the
internet or in the town newspapers most
parents say wait a minute my child's
school isn't doing what i want it to do and
therefore become involved in education i
recognize there are some who just don't
seem to care but there are a lot of
parents who feel like everything is
going well in their child's school and
all of a sudden they wake up and realize
that wait a minute standards aren't
being met that's why i'm so strong for
accountability i believe we ought to
measure a lot three four five six seven
eighth grade we do so in my state of
texas one of the good things we've done
in texas is we've got strong
accountability because you can't cure
unless you know you can't you can't
solve a problem unless you diagnose it i
strongly believe that one of the best
things to encourage parental involvement
also is to know that the classrooms will
be safe and secure
that's why i support a teacher liability
act at the federal level that says if
a teacher or principal upholds
reasonable standards of classroom
discipline they can't be sued they can't
be sued i think parents will be more
involved with education when they know
their children's classrooms are safe and
secure as well i also believe that we
need to say to people that if you cannot
meet standards there has to be a
consequence instead of just the kind of
the soft bigotry of low expectations
that there has to be a consequence we
can't continue to shuffle children
through school and one of the
consequences is to allow parents to have
different choices vice president gore
yeah we have a huge difference
between us on this question i'd like to
start by telling you what my vision is i
see a day in the united states of
america where all of our public schools
are considered excellent world class
where there are no failing schools where
the classrooms are small enough in size
number of students so that the teacher
can spend enough one-on-one time with
each with each student
now that means recruiting new teachers
for the public schools it means in my
plan hiring bonuses to get a hundred
thousand new teachers in the public
schools within the next four years it
means also helping local school
districts that sometimes find the
parents of school age children
outvoted on bond issues to give them
some help with interest-free bonding
authority so that we can build new
schools and modernize the classrooms we
need to give teachers the training and
professional development that they need
to including a paid time off to go
visit the classroom of a master teacher
and pick up some new skills i want to
give every middle-class family a ten
thousand dollar a year tax deduction for
college tuition so that so that
middle-class families will always be
able to send their kids on to college i
want to work for universal preschool
because we know from all the studies
that the youngsters learn
kids learn more in the first few years
of life than anywhere else now i said
there was a contrast governor bush is
for vouchers and in his plan he proposes
to drain more money more taxpayer money
out of the public schools for private
school vouchers than all of the money
that he proposes in his entire budget
for public schools themselves and only
one in 20 students would be eligible
for these vouchers and they wouldn't
even pay the full tuition to private
school i think that's a mistake i don't
think we should give up on the private
schools and leave kids trapped in
failing schools i think we i think we
should make it the number one priority
to make our schools the best in the
world all of them
governor what is your position on that
yeah i appreciate that i think anytime
we end with one of these attacks it's
appropriate to respond here's what
i think
first of all vouchers are up to states
if you want to do a voucher program in
missouri fine see i strongly believe in local
control of schools i'm
a governor of a state and i don't like it
when the federal government tells us
what to do
i believe in local control of schools
but here's what i've said i've said to
the extent we spend federal money on
disadvantaged children we want the
schools to show us whether or not the
children are learning what's
unreasonable about that we expect there
to be standards met and we expect there
to be measurement and if we find success
we'll praise it but when we find children
trapped in schools that will not change
and will not teach instead of saying oh
this is okay in america just to shuffle
poor kids through schools there has to
be a consequence and the consequence is
that federal portion of federal money
will go to the parent so the parent can
go to a tutoring program or another
public school or another private or
private school you see there has to be a
consequence we've got a society that
says hey the status quo is fine just
move them through and guess who suffers
what is the harm on vou what's the
other side on that well the the program
that he's proposing is not the one that
he just described described under your plan
governor bush states would be required
to pay vouchers to students to match the
the vouchers so that the federal
government would put up now here's and
the way it would happen is that under
his plan if a school was designated as
failing the kids would be trapped there
for another three years and then some of
them would get federal vouchers and the
state would be forced to to match those
that money under my plan if a school is
failing we work with the states to give
them the authority and the resources to
close down that school and reopen it
right away with a new principal a new
faculty a turnaround team of specialists
who know what they're doing it's based
on the plan of governor jim hunt in
north carolina and it works great so no
vouchers under a in a gore administration if i thought
that there was no alternative then i
might feel differently but i have an
obligation to fight to make sure there
are no failing schools we've gotta
turnaround all most schools are
excellent but we've got to make sure
that all of them are
andrew kosberg has a related question on
education that's right on this subject
mr kosberg where are you there you are and it's
for vice president gore mr vice
president in the school district in
which i work and in countless others
across the nation we face crumbling
school buildings increased school
violence student apathy overcrowding
lack of funding lawsuits the list goes
on i could mention low teacher pay but i
won't what can you tell me and my fellow
american teachers today about your plans
for our immediate future what grade do
you teach
oh oh up high school that's a violation of your rule
vice president gore high school
i mentioned before that that the local
communities are having a harder time
passing bond issues traditionally if
you've been involved in a campaign like
that you know that the parents with kids
in school are the ones that turn out and
vote it's ironic that there are now
there is now a smaller percentage of the
voters made up of parents with children
than ever in american history because of
the aging of our population but at the
same time we've got the largest
generation of students in public schools
ever more than 90% of america's children
go to public schools and the it's the
largest number ever this year and
they'll break the record next year and
every year for ten years running we've
got to do something about this and local
it's not enough to leave it up to the
local school districts they're not able
to do it and our future depends upon it
look we're in an information age our
economic future depends upon whether or
not our children are going to get the
kind of education that lets them go on
to college and again i want to make it
possible for all middle-class families
to send their kids to college and more
pell grants for those who are in the
lower-income groups also and then i want
to make sure that we have job training
on top of that and lifelong learning but
it all starts with the public school
teachers my proposal gives $10,000
hiring bonuses for those teachers who
are who get certified to teach in the
areas where they're most needed
now accountability we basically agree on
accountability my plan requires testing
of all students it also requires
something that governor bush's plan
doesn't it requires testing of all new
teachers including in the subjects that
they teach we have to start treating
teachers like the professionals that
they are and give them the respect and
the kind of quality of life that
will draw more people into teaching
because we need a lot more teachers
governor bush two minutes when you total
up all the federal spending he wants to
do it's the largest increase in federal
spending in years and there's just not going to
be enough money
i have been a governor of a big state
i have made education my number one
priority that's what
governors ought to do they ought to say
this is the most important thing we do
as a state the federal government puts
about six percent of the money up they put
about you know 60% of the strings where
you gotta fill out paperwork i don't
know if you have to be a paperwork
filler-outer but most of it's cause of
the federal government what i want to do
is to send flexibility and authority to
the local folks so you can choose what
to do with the money one size does not
fit all i'd worry about federalizing
education if i were you i believe
strongly that the federal government can
help we need to fund headstart
we need to have accountability the vice
president's plan does not have annual
accountability third grade fourth grade
fifth grade we need to demand on results
i believe strongly in a
teacher protection act like i mentioned
i hear from teachers all the time about
the lawsuits and the threats respect in
the classroom part of it's because you
can't you can't control the classroom
you can't have a consequence for
somebody without fear of getting sued
under federal law so i'm gonna ask the
congress to pass a teacher protection
act so i believe in flexibility i
believe in a national reading initiative
for local districts to access with k
through 2 diagnostic testing curriculum
that works phonics works by the way it
needs to be a part of our curriculum
there needs to be flexibility for
teacher training and teacher hiring with
federal money now the federal government
can be a be a part but don't fall prey
to all this stuff about money here and
money there because education is really
funded at the local level 94% comes from
the local level vice president gore is
the governor right when he says that
you're proposing the largest federal
spending in years absolutely not
absolutely not i'm so glad that i have a
chance to knock that down look the
problem is that under governor bush's
plan one point six trillion dollar tax
cut mostly to the wealthy
under his own budget numbers he proposes
spending more money for a tax cut just
for the wealthiest 1% than all of the
new money that he budgets for education
health care and national defense
combined now under my plan we will
balance the budget every year i'm not
just saying this i'm not just talking i
have helped to balance the budget for
the first time in 30 years paid down the
debt and under my plan in four years
as a percentage of our gross domestic
product federal spending will be the
smallest that it has been in 50 years
one reason is you know the third biggest
spending item in our budget is interest
on the national debt we get nothing for
it we keep the good faith and credit of the
united states i will pay down the debt
every single year until it is eliminated
early in the next decade that gets rid
of the the third biggest intrusion of
the federal government in in our economy
now because the governor has all this
money for a tax cut mostly to the
wealthy there is no money left over so
so schools get testing and and uh lawsuit
reform and and not much else
governor the vice president says you're
wrong well he's wrong just add up all
the numbers it's three times bigger than
what president clinton proposed the
senate budget committee three times excuse me
three times bigger than what president
clinton proposed that's in an ad jim that was knocked down
by the journalists who analyzed the
ad and said it was misleading my turn
yes sir forget the journalists he proposed more
than walter mondale and michael dukakis
combined this is a big spender he is and
he ought to be proud of it it's part of
his record we just have a different
philosophy let me talk about tax relief
if you pay taxes you ought to get tax
relief the vice president believes that
only the right people ought to get tax
relief i don't think that's the role of
the president to pick you're right and
you're not right i think if you're gonna
have tax relief everybody ought to get
it and therefore wealthy people are
gonna get it but the top 1% will end up
paying one third of the taxes in america
and they get one fifth of the benefits
and that's because we structured the
plan so that six million additional
american families pay no taxes if you're
a family of four making $50,000 in
missouri you get a 50% cut in your
federal income taxes what i've done is
set priorities and funded them and
there's extra money and i believe the
people who pay the bills oughtta
oughtta get some money back it's a difference
of opinion he wants to grow the
government and i trust you with your own
money i wish we could spend an
hour talking about trusting people cuz
it's the right position to take can we
extend the time yeah well hold on one sec here
though but but governor just to reverse
the thing what do you say specifically
to what the vice president said tonight
he said it many many times that your tax
cut benefits the top one percent of the
wealthiest americans and you've heard
what he said of course it does if you pay taxes
you're gonna get a benefit people who
pay taxes will get tax
relief all right then why why shouldn't they let me
finish please under my plan if you
make the top the wealthy people
pay 62% of the taxes today afterwards
they pay 64% this is a fair plan you
know why because the tax code is unfair
for people at the bottom end of the
economic ladder if you're a single
mother making $22,000 a year today and
you're trying to raise two children
for every additional dollar you earn you
pay a higher marginal rate on that
dollar than someone making
$200,000 and it's not right
vice president gore so i want to do something about
that alright vice president gore look
this isn't about governor bush it's not
about me it is about you and i want to
come back to something i said before if
you want somebody who believes that we
were better off eight years ago than we
are now and that we ought to go back to
the kind of policies that we had back
then emphasizing tax cuts mainly for the
wealthy here is your man if you want
somebody who will fight for you and who
will fight to have middle-class tax cuts
then i am your man i want to be now
i doubt anybody here makes more than
three hundred and thirty thousand
dollars a year i won't ask you but if
you do you're in the top 1% it would be
a violation of the rules they couldn't i'm
not going to ask i'm not going to ask
them but if everyone here in this audience
was was dead on in the middle of the
middle-class then the tax cuts for every
single one of you all added up would be
less than the tax cut his plan would
give to just one member of that top
wealthiest 1% now you judge for
yourselves whether or not that's fair
quick and then we're moving on
good fifty million americans get no tax
relief under his plan that's not right
you may not be one of them you're just
not one of the right people and secondly
we've had enough fighting it's time to
unite you talk about eight years in
eight years they haven't gotten anything
done on medicare on social security a
patient's bill of rights it's
time to get something done hey i've
got to answer that jim what what medicare we i
i cast the tie-breaking vote to add 26
years to the life of medicare it was due
to go bankrupt in 1999 and that 50
million figure again the newspapers i
said you you said forget the journalists
but they are the the keepers of the
score card and whether or not you're
uh using facts that aren't right and
that that fact is just not right
speaking of keepers of the score card
that's what i'm trying to do here mr
vice president and governor bush we're gonna we're gonna move
on we're gonna have to move on
alright there were twelve questions on
foreign and military matters and the
first one that we're going to ask will
be directed to you governor bush and
david norwood is going to ask it mr
norwood where are you there you are
what would you make what would make you
the best candidate in office during the
middle east crisis i've been a leader
been a person who has to set a clear
vision and convince people to follow i
uh i got a strategy for the middle east and
first let me say that our nation now
needs to speak with one voice during
this time and i applaud the president
for working hard to defuse tensions our
nation needs to be credible and strong
when we say we're somebody's friend
everybody's got to believe it
israel is our friend and we'll stand by
israel we need to reach out to moderate
arab nations as well to build coalitions
to keep the peace i i also need to the
next leader needs to be patient we can't
put the middle east peace process on our
timetable it's got to be on the
timetable of the of the people that are
trying to that we're trying to bring to
the peace table we can't dictate the
terms of peace which means that you have
to be steady can't worry about polls or
focus groups you've got to have a clear
vision that's what a leader does leader
also understands that the united states
must be strong to keep the peace
saddam hussein still is a threat in the
middle east our coalition against saddam
is unraveling sanctions are loosened
the man who may be developing weapons
of mass destruction we don't know
because inspectors aren't in so to answer
your question it requires a clear vision a
willingness to stand by our friends and
the credibility for people both friend
and foe to understand when america says
something we mean it
vice president gore
i see a future when the world is at
peace with the united states of america
promoting the values of democracy and
human rights and freedom all around the
world even in iran they have had an
election that began to bring about some
change we stand for those values and we
have to be willing to assert them right
now our military is the strongest in the
entire history of the world i will i
pledge to you i will do whatever is
necessary to make sure that it stays
that way
now what can i bring to that challenge
when i was a young man my father was a
senator opposed to the vietnam war when
i graduated from college there there
were plenty of fancy ways to get out of
going and being a part of that i went
and i volunteered and i went to vietnam
i didn't do the most or run the greatest
risk by a long shot but i learned what it
was like to be an enlisted man in the
united states army in the congress in
the house of representatives i served on
the house intelligence committee and i
worked hard to to learn the subject of
nuclear arms control and how we can
defuse these tensions and deal with
non-proliferation and deal with the
problems of terrorism and these new
weapons of mass destruction look we're
gonna face some serious new challenges
in the next four years i've worked on
that long and hard when i went to the
united states senate i asked for an
assignment to the armed services
committee and while i was there i worked
on a bipartisan basis as i did in the
house i worked with former president
reagan on the modernization of our
strategic weaponry in the in the senate
i was one of only ten democrats along
with senator joe lieberman to support
governor bush's dad in the persian gulf
war resolution and for the last eight
years i've served on the national
security council could i say just one
other thing here no sir
we'll get back i'm gonna
the next question is to you fine i'll wait
it's a related it's a related question
it's going to be asked by kenneth allen
mr allen i think that he he
gets a oh i'm sorry you're right go ahead mr
allen right there mr vice president um today our military
forces are stretched thinner and doing
more than they've ever done before
during peacetime i'd like to know
what you i think we'd all like to know
what you as president would do to ensure
proper resourcing for the current
mission and/or more selectively choosing
the time and place that our forces will
be used around the world thank you sir
just to finish briefly i started to say
that for the last eight years i've been
on the national security council and
last week i broke i suspended
campaigning for uh for two days or
parts of two days to go back and
participate in the meetings that charted
the president's summit meeting that he
just returned from earlier today and our
team of our country's team over there
did a did a great job it's a difficult
situation the united states has to be
strong in order to to make sure that we
can help promote peace and security and
stability and that means keeping our
military strong now i said earlier that
we are the strongest military but we
need to to continue improving readiness
and making sure that our military
personnel are adequately paid and that
the combination of their pay and their
benefits and their retirement as
veterans is is comparable to the stiff
competition that's coming in this strong
economy from the from the private sector
and what i have supported the largest
pay raise in many a year and i support
another one now i also support
modernization of our strategic and
tactical weaponry the governor's
proposed skipping a generation of
technology i think that's uh i think that
would be a mistake because i think one
of the ways we've been able to be so
successful in kosovo and bosnia and
haiti and in other places is by having
the technological edge you know we won
that conflict in kosovo without losing a
single human life in combat a single
american life in combat now readiness
the trends before we before i uh got my
current job were on the decline
the number of divisions were reduced i
argued that we should reverse that trend
and take it back up and i'm happy to
tell you that we have now in my budget
for the next for the next ten years i
propose a hundred billion dollars for
this purpose the governor proposes
forty-five billion i propose more than twice
as much because i think it's needed
governor bush two minutes if this were a
spending contest i'd come in second i
readily admit i i'm not gonna grow the
size of the federal government like he
is here's your question was deployment
it must be in the national interests
must be in our vital interests whether
we ever send troops the mission must be
clear soldiers must understand why are
we going the force must be strong enough
so that the mission can be accomplished
and the exit strategy needs to be well-defined
i'm concerned that we're overdeployed
around the world see i think the mission
has somewhat become fuzzy should i be
fortunate enough to earn your confidence the
mission of the united states military
will be to be prepared and ready to
fight and win war and therefore prevent
war from happening in the first place
there may be some moments when we use
our troops as peacekeepers but not often
the vice president mentioned my view
of long-term for the military i want
to make sure the equipment for our
military is the best it can possibly be
of course but we have an opportunity we
have an opportunity to use our research
and development capacities the great
technology of the united states to make
our military lighter harder to find more
lethal we have an opportunity really if
you think about it if we're smart and
have got a strategic vision and a leader
who understands strategic planning to make
sure that our we change the change the
terms of the battlefield of the future
so we can make keep the peace this is a
peaceful nation and i intend to keep the
peace spending money is one thing but
spending money without a strategic plan
can oftentimes be wasted first thing i'm
going to do is ask the secretary of
defense develop a plan so we making sure we're
not spending our money on political
projects but on projects to make sure
our soldiers are well-paid
well-housed and have the best equipment
in the world governor bush another kind
of gun question
it'll be asked by robert lutz mr lutz
governor bush yes sir
would just like to know what is your
opposition to uh the brady gun handgun
bill could you i'm sorry i didn't hear that
would like to know why you object to the
brady handgun bill if you do object to
it because on a recent tv ad it showed
that the national rifle association says
that if you are elected that they will be
working out of your office i can just see charlton heston i
don't think the national rifle
association ran that ad but let me just
tell you my position on guns in general
sir if you don't mind excuse me i'm not sure
he's finished with his question governor i'm
sorry that kind of bothers me you know
when i see that ad like that i want you
can explain that ad to me
well i don't think i ran the ad i think
somebody who doesn't want me to be president
might have run that ad it's uh that wasn't my
ad and uh i think it might have been one of my
opponent's ads here is what i believe sir
i believe law-abiding citizens ought to
be allowed to protect themselves and
their families i believe that we ought
to keep guns out of the hands of people
who shouldn't have them that's why i'm
for instant background checks at gun
shows i'm for trigger locks i think that
makes sense
matter of fact we distributed free
trigger locks in the state of texas so
that people can get them and put them on
their guns to make their guns more safe i
think we ought to raise the age at which
juveniles can have a gun but i also
believe strongly that we need to enforce
laws on the books that the best way to
make sure that we keep our society safe
and secure is to hold people accountable
for breaking the law if we catch
somebody illegally selling a gun there
needs to be a consequence if we keep it
somebody you know illegally using a gun
there needs to be a consequence
enforcement of law and the federal
government can help there's a great program
called project exile in richmond
virginia we focused federal taxpayers
money and
federal prosecutors and went after people who
were illegally illegally using guns to
me that's how you make society the
safest it can be and so yeah sometimes i
agree with some of these groups in
washington and sometimes i don't i'm a
pretty independent thinker but one thing
i'm for is a safe society and i'm for
enforcing laws on the books and that's
what's gonna happen should i earn your
confidence vice president gore well one
it was not one of my ads either
governor but i am familiar with the
statement and it was made by one of the
top-ranking officials of that
organization let me tell you my position
i think that some common-sense gun
safety measures are certainly needed
with the flood of cheap handguns that
have sometimes been working their way
into the hands of the wrong people but
all of my proposals are focused on that
problem gun safety none of my proposals
would have any effect on hunters or
sportsmen or people who use rifles
they're they're aimed at the real problem
let's make our schools safe let's make
our neighborhoods safe let's
have a three-day waiting period cooling
off so we can have a background check to
make sure that criminals and people who
really shouldn't have guns don't get
them but i'd like to use my remaining
time on this exchange jim to respond to
just to an exchange that took place just
a moment ago because a couple of times
the governor has said that i am for a
bigger government governor i'm not and
let me tell you what the record shows
for the last eight years i have had the
the challenge of running the
streamlining program called reinventing
government and if there are any federal
employees in this group you know what
that means the federal government has
been reduced in size by more than
300,000 people and it's now the smallest
number that we have had since the
smallest in size since john kennedy's
administration during the the last five
years texas's government has gone up in
size federal government has gone down texas's
government has gone up now my plan for
the future i see a time when we have
smaller smarter government where you
don't have to wait in line because you
can get services online cheaper better
faster we can do that steve luecker has a
question and it is for vice president
gore mr luecker there you are
vice president gore the family farms are
disappearing and having a hard time even
in the current positive economic
environment what steps would you or your
administration take on agriculture
policy developments to protect the
family farms for this multi-functional
service they perform we've got a bumper
crop this year but that's the good news
you know what the bad news is that
follows on that the prices are low in
the last several years the so-called
freedom to farm law has in my view been
mostly a failure i want to change many
of its provisions now many here will who
are not involved in farming don't won't
follow this so just forgive me because
the 2% of the country that is involved
in farming is important because the rest
of us wouldn't eat except for them and
and you guys have been having a hard
time and i want to fight for you i want
to change those provisions i want to
restore a meaningful safety net and i
think that you pointed the way in your
comments because when you say they're
there are multiple things accomplished by
farmers you're specifically including
conservation and protection of the
environment and yes farmers are the
first environmentalists and when they
decide not to plow a field that is
vulnerable to soil erosion that may cost
them a little money but it helps the
environment i think that we ought to
have an expanded conservation reserve
program and i think that the
environmental benefits that come from
sound management of the land ought to
represent a new way for farmers to get
some income that will enable them enable
you to make sensible choices in crop
rotation and when you leave the land
fallow and the rest now i'll go beyond
that and say i think we need much more
focused rural economic development
programs i see a time when uh when the
internet-based activities are more
available in the rural areas and where
the extra source of income that farm
families used to have from shoe
factories is replaced by an extra source
of income from from working in the
information economy so we need to do a
lot of things but we ought to start with
a better safety net governor bush two
minutes i'd like our farmers feeding the world
we're the best in the we're the best
producers in the world and i want i
want the farmers feeding the world we
need to open up markets exports are down
and every time an export number goes
down it hurts the farmer i want the next
president to have fast track negotiating
authority to open up markets around the
world we're the best we're the most efficient
efficient farmers i don't want to use
food as a diplomatic weapon from this
point forward we shouldn't be using food
it hurts the farmers it's not the right
thing to do
i'm for value-added processing we
need to make more work on value-added
processing so you take the raw product you
produce i presume you're a farmer off your
farm and convert it i think value-added
processing is important
i'm for research and development
spending research and development money
so that we can use our technological
base to figure out new uses for farm
products i'm for getting rid of the death
tax completely getting rid of the death
tax one reason family farmers are
forced to sell early is because of the
death tax this is a bad tax the
president shouldn't have vetoed that
bill it's a uh it's a tax that taxes people
twice it penalizes the family farmer
so should i be fortunate enough to earn your
vote i also underst i want to open up markets
but i also understand that farming is a
part of our national security i'm from a
big farm state we're the second biggest
state farming state in the country and i
hear from my farmers and friends all the
time vice president's right by the way
every day is earth day if you own the
land and uh i like the policies
that will encourage farmers to put
set aside land as well for conservation
purposes thank you a quick thing on the
inheritance tax there is
a difference between the two of you on
this vice president gore yeah
i'm for a massive reform of the estate
tax or the death tax and under the
plan that i've proposed 80% of all
family farms will be completely exempt
from the estate tax and and
the vast majority of all family
businesses would be completely exempt
and all of the others would have sharply
reduced so 80% now the problem with
completely eliminating it goes back to
the to the wealthiest 1% the amount of
money that has to be raised in taxes
from middle-class families to make up
for completely eliminating that on on
the very wealthiest the billionaires that
would that would be an extra heavy
burden on middle-class families and so
let's do it for most all but not
completely eliminate it for the very top
what's the case for doing that
governor eliminating the death tax
completely for everybody because people shouldn't be
taxed twice on their assets it's either
unfair for some or unfair for all
again this is just a difference of
opinion if you're from washington you
want to pick and choose winners i don't
think that's the role of the president i
think if you're gonna have tax relief
everybody benefits secondly i think
your plan a lot of fine print
in your plan mr vice president in
all due respect it is i'm not so sure
80% of the people get get the death tax i
know this 100 percent will get it if i
if i'm the president i just
don't think it's fair to tax people's
assets twice regardless of your
status it's a fairness issue it's an
issue of principle not politics new issue new issue and the question will be asked by joyce cleamer of governor bush joyce cleamer there you are hi joyce yes hi governor i'm
very concerned about the morality of our
country now tv movies the music that our
children are
are you know barraged with every day and
i want to know if there's anything that
can be worked out with the hollywood or
whoever to help get rid of some of this
bad language and the whatever you know
it's just bringing the country down and
our children are very important to us
and we're concerned about their
education at school we should be
concerned about their education at home
also thank you appreciate that question laura
and i are proud parents of teenage girls
twin daughters and i know what you're
saying government ought to stand on the side of
parents parents are teaching their
children right from wrong and the
message oftentimes gets undermined
by the popular culture you bet there's
things that government can do we can work
with the entertainment industry to
provide family hour we can have filters
on internets where public money is spent
there ought to be filters in public
libraries and filters in public schools
so if kids get on the internet they're
not going to be pornography or violence
coming in i think we ought to have
character education in our schools i
know that doesn't directly talk about
hollywood but it does reinforce the
values you're teaching i could greatly
expand character education funding so
that public schools will teach children
values values which have stood the test
of time
there's afterschool money available i
think that afterschool money ought to
be available for faith-based programs
and charitable programs that exist
because somebody has heard the call to
love a neighbor like you'd like to be
loved yourself that will help reinforce
the values that parents teach at home as
well i just ours is a great land and one
of the reasons why is because we're free
and so i don't support censorship but i
do believe that we ought to talk plainly
to the hollywood moguls and people who
produce this stuff and explain the
consequences i think we need to have
rating systems that are clear and i
happen to like the idea of having
technology for the tv easy for parents
to use so you can tune out these
programs that you don't want in your
house but i'ma remind mothers
and dads the best weapon is the off on
button and paying attention to your
children and eating dinner with them and
uh being i'm sorry that's alright was on my
peroration my turn vice
president gore i care a lot about this
it's not just movies television video
games music the internet parents now
feel like you have to compete with the
mass culture in order to raise your kids
with the values that you want them to
have tipper and i have four children and
god bless them every one of them decided
on their own to come here this evening i
don't want to embarrass our oldest
daughter she and her husband made us
grandparents almost a year and a half
ago and and yet if she'll forgive me
when she was little she brought a record
home that had some awful lyrics in it
and and tipper hit the ceiling and that
launched a campaign to try to get the
record companies to put ratings that
warning labels for for parents and i'm
so proud of what she accomplished in
getting them on there i've been involved
myself in negotiating and in helping to
move along the negotiations with the
internet service providers to get a
parents protection page every time 95%
of the pages come up and a feature that
allows parents to automatically check
with one click what sites your kids have
visited lately you know some parents are
worried about those filters that you'll
have to ask your kids how to put them on
there but if you can check up on them
then you you you that's real power
and recently the federal trade
commission pointed out that some of
these entertainment companies have
warned parents that the material is
inappropriate for children and then they've
turned around behind the backs of the
parents and advertised that same adult
material directly to children that is an
outrage joe lieberman and i gave them six months
to clean up their act and if they don't
do it we're gonna ask for tougher
authority on in the hands of the ftc on
the false and deceptive advertising i'll
tell you this i want to do something
about this respect the first amendment
but i will do something to help you
raise your kids without that garbage alright
vice president gore the next question is
for you and it will be asked by steven
koosmann mr koosmann where are you sir
right behind me as well there we go
right next to the last yeah got it
good planning it seems that when we hear
about issues of this campaign it's
usually medicare social security or
prescription drugs as a college
professor i hear a lot of apathy amongst
young people who feel that there are no
issues directed to them and they
don't plan to vote how do you
address that we've got to change it i
spend a good deal of time talking to
young people and in my standard speech
out there on the stump i i usually end my
speech by saying i want to ask you for
something and i want to direct it
especially to the young people in the
audience and i want to tell you what i
tell them sometimes people who are very
idealistic and have great dreams as
young people do are apt to stay at arm's
length from the political process
because they think their good hearts
might be brittle and if they invest
their hopes and allow themselves to
believe then they're gonna be let down
and disappointed
but thank goodness we've always had
enough people who have been willing in
every generation to push past the fear
of a broken heart and become deeply
involved in forming a more perfect union
we're america and and we we believe in
our future and we know we have the
ability to shape our future now we've
got to address one of the one of the
biggest threats to our democracy and
that is the current campaign financing
system and i know they say it doesn't
rank anywhere on the polls i don't
believe i don't believe that's a fair
measure i'm telling you
i will make it the i will make the
mccain-feingold campaign finance reform
bill the very first measure that i send
to the congress as president governor
bush opposes it i wish that he would
consider changing his mind on that
because i think that the special
interests have too much power and we
need to give our democracy back to the
american people let me tell you why
those issues you mentioned social
security prescription drugs the big drug
companies are against the prescription
drug proposal that i've made the the
hmos are against the patient's rights
bill the dingle-norwood bill that i
support and that governor bush does not
support the big oil companies are
against the measures to get more
energy independence and renewable fuels
they ought to have their voices heard
but they shouldn't have a big megaphone
that drowns out the american people we
need campaign finance reform and we need
to shoot straight with young and old
alike and tell them what the real
choices are and we can renew and
rekindle the american spirit and make
our future what our founders dreamed it
could be we can governor bush two
minutes i'll tell you what i hear a lot
of people are sick and tired of
the bitterness in washington dc and
therefore they don't want any part of
politics they look at washington and see
people pointing fingers and casting
blame and saying one thing and doing another there's a
lot of young folks saying you know why
do i want to be involved with this mess
and what i think needs to happen in
order to encourage the young to become
involved is to shoot straight is to set
aside the partisan differences and set
an agenda that will make sense medicare
i know you talked about it but medicare
is is relevant for all of us young and
old alike we better get it right now
tax reform is relevant for old and young
alike i don't think it's the issues that
turn kids off i think it's the tone i
think it's the attitude i think it's a
cynicism in washington and it doesn't
have to be that way before i decided to
run i had to resolve two issues in my
mind one could our family endure all
this business and i came to the
conclusion that our love was strong
enough to be able to do it the other was
could an administration change the tone
in washington dc and i believe the
answer is yes otherwise i wouldn't be
asking for your vote that's what
happened in texas we work together
there's a man here in this audience
named hugo berlanga he is the chairman of
the health committee he came here for a
reason to tout our record on health in
texas he's a democrat i didn't care
whether you're republican or democrat what i
cared about is could we work together
that's what washington dc needs and
finally sir to answer your question you
need somebody in office who will tell
the truth
that's the best way to get people back
in the system
governor bush norma curby has the next
question and it's for you norma curby
where are you hi norma
hi how will your administration address
diversity inclusiveness and what role
will affirmative action play in your
overall plan i've had a record of
bringing people from all walks of life
into my administration and my
administration is better off for it in
texas i'm going to find people that want
to serve their country but i want a
diverse administration i think it's
important i've worked hard in the state
of texas to make sure our institutions are
reflect the state with good smart policy
policy that rejects quotas
i don't like quotas quotas tend to pit
one group of people against another
quotas are bad for america it's not the
way america is all about
but policies that that give people a
helping hand so they can help themselves for
example in our state of texas i worked
with the legislature both republicans
and democrats to pass a law that said if
you come in the top 10% of your high
school class you're automatically
admitted to one of our one of our higher
institutions of higher institutions of
learning college and as a result our
universities are now more diverse
it was a smart thing to do is what i
called it i labeled it affirmative
access i think the contracting business
in government can help
not with quotas but help meet a goal of
ownership of small businesses for
example the contracts need to be smaller
the agencies need to be you know need
to recruit and to work hard to find
people to bid on the state contracts i
think we can do that in a way that uh that
represents what america is all about
which is equal opportunity and uh and an
opportunity for people to realize their
potential so to answer your question i
support i guess the way to put it is
affirmative access and i'll have an
administration that will make you proud
thank you vice president gore i believe
in this goal and this effort with all my
heart i believe that our future as a
nation depends upon whether or not we
can break down these barriers that have
been used to pit group against group and
and bring our people together how do you
do it well you you establish respect for
differences you don't ignore differences
it's all too easy for somebody in the
majority in the population to say oh
we're just all all the same without an
understanding of the different life
experience that you've had that others
have had once you have that
understanding and mutual respect then we
can transcend the differences and
embrace the highest common denominator
of the american spirit i don't know what
affirmative access means i do know what
affirmative action means i know the
governor is against it and i know that
i'm for it i know what a hate crime
statute pending at the national level is
all about in the aftermath of james
byrd's death i'm for that proposed law
the governor is against it i know what
it means to have a commitment to
diversity i am part of an administration
that has the finest record on diversity
and and incidentally an excellent i mean
i think our success over the last eight
years has not been in spite of diversity
but because of it because we're able to
draw on the wisdom and experience from
from different parts of the society that
hadn't been tapped in the same way before
and incidentally mel carnahan in
missouri had the finest record on
diversity of any governor in the entire
history of the state of missouri and i
want to honor that among his other
achievements here now i i just believe
that what we have to do is enforce the
civil rights laws i'm against quotas
this is uh with all due respect
governor that's a red herring
affirmative action isn't quotas i'm
against quotas they're illegal they're
against the american way affirmative
action means that you take extra steps
to acknowledge the history of
discrimination and injustice and
prejudice and bring all people into the
american dream because it helps
everybody not just those who are
directly benefitting
governor what is your are you opposed to
affirmative action naw if affirmative
action means quotas i'm against it if
affirmative action means what i just
described what i'm for then i'm for it
you heard what i was for vice president keeps
saying i'm against things you heard what
i was for and that's what i support what
about mr vice president you heard what
he said he said if affirmative action
means quotas he's against it affirmative
action doesn't mean good quotas are you
for it without quotas i may not be for
your version mr vice president but i am
for what i just described to the lady
are you for what the supreme court says is a
constitutional way of having affirmative
action jim is this let's go on to another
another i think that speaks for itself no doesn't speak for
itself mr vice president it speaks
for the fact that there are certain
rules in this that we all agree to but
evidently rules don't mean anything the
question is for you vice president gore
and lisa kee will ask it lisa kee
where are you there we go sorry how will
your tax proposals affect me as a
middle-class 34 year old single person
with no dependents if you make less than
$60,000 a year and you decide to invest
$1,000 in a savings account you'll get a
tax credit which means in essence that
the federal government will match your
thousand dollars with another thousand
dollars if you make less than thirty
thousand dollars a year and you put five
hundred dollars in a savings account the
federal government will match it with
fifteen hundred dollars if you make more
than sixty thousand up to a hundred
you'll still get a match but not as
generous you will get a access to lifelong
learning and education help with tuition
if you want to get a new skill or or
training if you if you want to purchase
health insurance you will get help with
that if you want to participate in some
of the dynamic changes that are going on
in in our country you will get specific
help in doing that if you are part of
the of the bottom 20% or so of wage
earners then you will get an expanded
earned income tax credit now the tax
relief that i propose is directed
specifically at middle-income
individuals and families and if you have
a if you have an elderly parent or
grandparent who needs long-term care
then you will get help with that $3,000
tax credit to help your expenses in
taking care of a loved one who needs
long-term care governor bush
right let me just say the first this
business about kind of the
entitlement he tried to describe about
savings you know matching savings here and
matching savings there if fully funded it's
gonna cost a whole lot of money a lot
more than we have you're gonna get tax
relief under my plan you're not gonna be
targeted in or targeted out everybody
who pays taxes is gonna get tax relief if you
take care of an elderly in your home you're
gonna get the personal exemption
increased i think also what you need to
think about is not the immediate but
what about medicare you get a plan that
will include prescription drugs a plan
that will give you options now i hope
people understand that medicare today is
is is important but it doesn't keep up
with the new medicines if you're a
medicare person on medicare you don't
get the new procedures it's stuck
in a time warp in many ways so it'll be
a modern medicare system that trusts you
to make a variety of options for you
you're gonna live in a peaceful world
it'll be a world of peace because we're
gonna have a clear clear sighted foreign
policy based upon a strong military and a
mission that stands by our friends a
mission that doesn't try to be all
things to all people a judicious use
of the military which will help keep the
peace you'll be in a world hopefully
that's more educated so it's less likely
you'll be harmed in your neighborhood
see an educated child is one much more
likely to be hopeful and optimistic
you'll be in a world in which fits into
my philosophy you know the harder work
the harder you work the more you can
keep it's the american way government
shouldn't be a heavy hand it's what the federal
government does to you it should be a helping
hand and tax relief and the proposals i
just described should be a good helping
hand governor next question is for you
and leo anderson will ask it mr
anderson you want a mic
in one of the last debates held the
subject of capital punishment came up
and in your response to the question you
seemed overly enjoy as a matter of fact
proud that texas leads led the nation in
execution of prisoners uh sir did i
misread your response and are you
really really proud of the fact that
texas is number one in executions no i'm
not proud of that death penalty is very
serious business leo it's uh it's an
issue that good people obviously
disagree on i take my job seriously
and uh if you think i was proud of it i i
think you misread me i do i uh i was sworn
to uphold the laws of my state during the
course of the campaign in 1994 i was
asked do you support the death penalty i
said i did if administered fairly and
justly cause i believe it saves lives
leo i do i think if it's administered
swiftly justly and fairly it saves lives
one of the things that happens when
you're a governor at least oftentimes
you have to make tough decisions and you
can't let public persuasion sway you
because the job is to enforce the law
and that's what i did sir there's been some
tough cases come across my desk
some of the hardest moments since i've
been the governor of the state of texas
is to deal with those cases but my job
is to ask two questions sir
is the person guilty of the crime and
did the person have full access to the
courts of law and i can tell you looking
at you right now in all cases those
answers were affirmative i'm not proud
of any record i'm proud of the fact that
violent crime is down in the state of
texas i'm proud of the fact that uh that
uh that we hold people accountable but i'm
not proud of any record sir i'm not vice
president gore i support the death
penalty i think that it has to be
administered not only fairly with
attention to things like dna evidence
which i think should be used in all
capital cases but also with a very
careful attention if for example
somebody confesses to the crime and
somebody's waiting on death row there
has to be alertness to to say wait a
minute have we got the wrong guy if the
wrong guy is put to death then that's a
double tragedy not only has an innocent
person been executed but the real
perpetrator of the crime has not been
held accountable for it and in some
cases may be still at large but i
support the death penalty in the most
heinous cases do both of you believe
that the death penalty actually deters
crime governor i do that's the only
reason to be for it i don't let me
finish sir sure i don't think you should support the
death penalty to seek revenge i don't
think that's right i think the reason to
support the death penalty is because it
saves other people's lives vice
president gore i think it is a
deterrence i know that's a controversial
view but i do believe it's a
deterrence alright next question is
for you vice president gore and thomas
fischer will ask it mr fischer
yes my 6th grade class at st
claire's school wanted to ask of all these
promises you guys are making and all the
pledges will you keep them when you're
in office
yes i am a person who keeps promises and
you know we've heard a lot about from
the governor about not much being done
in the last eight years as if the
promises that i made eight years ago
have not been kept i think the record
shows otherwise we have gone from the
biggest deficits eight years ago to the
biggest surpluses in history today
instead of high unemployment we now have
the low the lowest african-american
unemployment the lowest latino
unemployment ever measured 22 million
new jobs very low unemployment
nationally instead of ballooning the
debt and multiplying it four times over
we have seen the debt actually begun to
be paid down here are some promises that
i'll make to you now i will balance the
budget every year i will pay down the
debt every year i will give middle-class
americans tax cuts meaningful ones and i
will invest in education health care
protecting the environment and
retirement security we both made
promises in this campaign i promise you
i will keep mine let me tell you about
one of the governor's he has promised a
trillion dollars out of the social
security trust fund for young working
adults to invest and save on their own
but he's promised seniors that their
social security benefits will not be cut
and he's promised the same trillion
dollars to them so this is a show me
state reminds me of the line from the movie
show me the money which one of those
promises will you keep and which will you break
governor governor bush thank you for
your question i um
i uh there's an old high school debating
trick which is to answer something and
then attack your opponent at the end
you asked about promises you were
promised that medicare would be reformed
and that social security would be reformed you
were promised a middle-class tax cut in
1992 it didn't happen
there's too much bitterness in
washington there's too much wrangling
it's time to have a fresh start one of
the reasons i was successful as the
governor of texas is because i didn't
try to be all things to all people when
i campaigned in a race a lot of folks
didn't think i could win including by
the way my mother i said i'd do four
things tort reform education reform
welfare reform and juvenile justice
reform and i won and i had the will of
the people in my state behind me and then i
brought folks together to get it done
and that's what we need i think in this
election to me that's what it's all
about i know listen i'm sure your
6th grade kids are listening to these
guys will say anything to get elected
but there's a record and that's what i
hope people look at one of my
promises is gonna be social security
reform and you bet we need to take
trillion dollar trillion dollars out of
that two point four trillion dollar
now remember social security revenue
exceeds expenses up until 2015 people
are going to get paid but if you're a
younger worker if you're younger you
better hope this country thinks
differently otherwise you're gonna be
faced with huge payroll taxes or reduced
benefits and you bet we're gonna take a
trillion dollars of your own money and
let you invest it under safe
guidelines so you get a better rate of
return on the money than the paltry 2%
that the federal government gets for you
today that's one of my promises but it's
gonna require people to bring both
republicans and democrats together to
get it done that's what it requires
there was a chance to get this done
there was bipartisan ref bipartisan
approach but it's been rejected i'm
gonna bring them together both of you to
both of you
on this subject there are other
questions that also go to this
skepticism not necessarily about you but
all people in politics why is that well
first of all jim i'd like to i'd like to
respond to what the governor just said
because the the trillion dollars that
has been promised to young people has
also been promised to older people and
you cannot keep both promises if you're
in your mid-40s under the governor's
plan social security will be bankrupt by
the time you retire if he takes it out
of the social security trust fund under
my plan it will be its solvency will be
extended until you're a hundred now that
is the difference and the governor may
not want to answer that question he may
want to call it a high school debating
trick but let me tell you this this
election is not about debating tricks it
is about your future
the reason social security he says it
gets 2% you know it's not a bank account
it also that that just pays back money
that's invested it is also used to give
your mothers and fathers the social
security checks that they live on if you
take a trillion dollars out of that
social security trust fund how are the
checks going to be how are you gonna
keep faith with the seniors now let me
come let me come directly to your
question we're we have to go to the
closing statements and well can i
answer that one reason people
are skeptical is cause people don't
answer the questions they've been asked
the trillion dollars comes out of the
surplus so that you can invest some of
your own money there's just a difference
of opinion i want workers to have their
own assets it's who you trust government or
people alright now we're gonna go to
closing statements right vice president
gore you're first thank you very
much jim and i'll begin by answering
your questions your last
question i believe that a lot of people
are skeptical about people in politics
today because we have seen a time of of
great challenge for our country
since the assassination of our best
leaders in the 60s since the vietnam war
since watergate and because we need
campaign finance reform i'd like to tell
you something about me i keep my word i
have kept the faith i i've kept the faith with
my country i volunteered for the army i
served in vietnam i kept the faith with
my family tipper and i've been married
for thirty years we have devoted
ourselves to our children and now our
nearly one and a half year old grandson
i have kept the faith with our country
nine times i have raised my hand to take
an oath to the constitution and i have
never violated that oath i have not
spent the last quarter century in
pursuit of personal wealth i have spent
the last quarter century fighting for
middle-class working men and women in
the united states of america i believe
very deeply that you have to be willing
to stand up and fight no matter what
powerful forces might be on the other
side if you want somebody who is willing
to fight for you i am asking for your
support and your vote and yes your
confidence and your willingness to
believe that we can do the right thing
in america and be the better for it
we've made some progress during the last
eight years we have seen the strongest
economy in the history of the united
states lower crime rates for the for
eight years in a row highest private
homeownership ever but i'll make you one
promise here you ain't seen nothing
yet and i will keep that promise
governor bush two minutes well jim i
want to thank you and thank the folks
here at washington university and the
vice president appreciate the chance to
have a good honest dialogue about our
differences of opinion and i think after
three debates good people of this country
understand there is a difference of
opinion it's the difference between big
federal government and somebody who's
coming from outside of washington who
will trust individuals i've got an
agenda that i want to get done for the
country it's an agenda that says we're gonna
reform medicare to make sure seniors
have got prescription drugs and to give
seniors different options from which they
can choose it's an agenda that says we're gonna
listen to the young voices in social
security and say we're going to think
differently about making sure we have a
system but also fulfill the promise to
the seniors in america promise made will
be a promise kept should i be fortunate
enough to become your president i want
to rebuild the military to keep the
peace i want to make sure the public
school system in america fulfills its
promise so that no child not one child
is left behind and after setting
priorities i want to give some of the
some of your money back
see i don't think the surplus is the
government's money i think it's the
people's money i don't think the surplus
exists because of the ingenuity and hard
work of the federal government i think
it exists because of the ingenuity and
hard work of the american people and you
ought to have some of this surplus so
you can save and dream and build i look
forward to the final weeks of this
campaign i'm asking for your vote for
those of you for me thanks for your help
for those of you for my opponent please
only vote once
but for those who've not made up their
mind i'd like to conclude by this
promise should i be fortunate enough to
become your president when i put my hand
on the bible i will swear to not only
uphold the laws of the land but i will
also swear to uphold the honor and the
dignity of the office to which i have
been elected so help me god
thank you very much a closing piece of
business before we go the debate
commission wants reaction to the three
kinds of formats used in the debates
this year and you may register an
opinion at their website www debates dot org thank you vice president gore
governor bush from st louis i'm jim
lehrer thank you and goodnight